She canalizes through women. If they are suppressed, she struggles upward. If women are free, she is free. Fortunately, no matter how many times
she is pushed down, she bounds up again. No matter how many times she is forbidden, quelled, cut back, diluted, tortured, touted as unsafe,
dangerous, mad, and other derogations, she emanates upward in women, so that even the most quiet, even the most restrained woman keeps a secret
place for her. Even the most repressed woman has a secret life, with secret thoughts and secret feelings which are lush and wild, that is, natural. Even
the most captured woman guards the place of the wildish self, for she knows intuitively that someday there will be a loophole, an aperture, a chance,
and she will hightail it to escape.
I believe that all women and men are born gifted. However, and truly, there has been little to describe the psychological lives and ways of gifted women,
talented women, creative women. There is, on the other hand, much writ about the weakness and foibles of humans in general and women in particular. But
in the case of the Wild Woman archetype, in older to fathom her, apprehend her, utilize her offerings, we must be more interested in the thoughts, feelings,
and endeavors which strengthen women, and adequately count the interior and cultural factors which weaken women.
In general, when we understand the wildish nature as a being in its own right, one which animates and informs a woman's deepest life, then we can begin
to develop in ways never thought possible. A psychology which fails to address this innate spiritual being at the center of feminine psychology fails
women, and fails their daughters and their daughters’ daughters far into all future matrilineal lines.
So, in order to apply a good medicine to the hurt parts of the wildish psyche, in order to aright relationship to the archetype of the Wiki Woman, one
has to name the disarrays of the psyche accurately. While in my clinical profession we do have a good diagnostic statistical manual and a goodly amount
of differential diagnoses, as well as psychoanalytic parameters which define psychopathy through the organization (or lack of it) in the objective psyche
and the ego-Self axis.
