I was lucky to be brought up in Nature. There, lightning strikes taught me about sudden death and the evanescence of life. Mice litters showed that death was
softened by new life. When I unearthed Indian beads" fossils from the loam, I understood that humans have been here a long, long time. I learned about the
sacred art of self-decoration with monarch butterflies perched atop my head, lightning bugs as my night jewelry, and emerald-green frogs as bracelets.
A wolf mother killed one of her mortally injured pups; this taught a hard compassion and the necessity of allowing death to come to the dying. The fuzzy
caterpillars which fell from their branches and crawled back up again taught single:
mindedness. Their tickle-walking on my arm taught how skin can come alive.
Climbing to the tops of trees taught what sex would someday feel like.
My own post-World War II generation grew up in a time when women were infantilized and treated as property. They were kept as fallow gardens ... but
thankfully there was always wild seed which arrived on the wind. Though what they wrote was unauthorized, women blazed away anyway. Though what they
painted went unrecognized, it fed the soul anyway. Women had to beg for the instruments and the spaces needed for their arts, and if none were forthcoming,
they made space in trees, caves, woods, and closets.
Dancing was barely tolerated, if at all, so they danced in the forest where no one could see them, or in the basement, or on the way out to empty the trash.
Self-decoration caused suspicion. Joyful body or dress increased the danger of being harmed or sexually assaulted. The very clothes on ones shoulders could not
be called ones own.
It was a time when parents who abused their children were
simply called strict, when the spiritual lacerations of profoundly exploited women were referred to as nervous breakdowns, when girls and women who
were tightly girdled, tightly reined, and tightly muzzled were called nice, and those other females who managed to slip the collar for a moment or two of
life were branded bad.