She comes to us through sound as well; through music which vibrates the sternum, excites the heart; it comes through file drum, the whistle, the call,
and the cry. It comes through the written and the spoken word; sometimes a word, a sentence or a poem or a story, is so resonant, so right, it causes us
to remember, at least for an instant, what substance we are really made from, and where is our true home.
These transient tastes of the wild come during the mystique of inspiration—ah, there it is; oh, now it has gone. The longing for her comes when one
happens across someone who has secured this wildish relationship. The longing comes when one realizes one has given scant time to the mystic
cookfire or to the dream- time, too little time to ones own creative life, ones life work, or ones true loves.
Yet it is these fleeting tastes which come both through beauty as well as loss, that cause us to become so bereft, so agitated, so longing that we
eventually must pursue the wildish nature. Then we leap into the forest or into the desert or into the snow and run hard, our eyes scanning the ground,
our hearing sharply tuned, searching under, searching over, searching for a clue, a remnant, a sign that she still lives, that we have not lost our chance.
And when we pick up her trail, it is typical of women to ride hard to catch up, to clear off the desk, clear off the relationship, clear out ones mind, turn
to a new page, insist on a break, break the rules, stop the world, for we are not going on without her any longer.
Once women have lost her and then found her again, they will contend to keep her for good. Once they have regained her, they will fight and fight
hard to keep her, for with her their creative lives blossom; their relationships gain meaning and depth and health; their cycles of sexuality, creativity,
work, and play are reestablished; they are no longer marks for the predations of others; they are entitled equally under the laws of nature to grow and to
thrive. Now their end-of-the-day fatigue comes from satisfying work and endeavors, not from being shut up in too small a mindset, job, or relationship.
They know instinctively when things must die and when things must live; they know how to walk away, they know how to stay.
When women reassert their relationship with the wildish nature, they are gifted with a permanent and internal watcher, a knower, a visionary, an
oracle, an inspiratrice, an intuitive, a maker, a creator, an inventor, and a listener who guide, suggest, and urge vibrant life in the inner and outer worlds.
When women are close to this nature, the fact of that relationship glows through
them. This wild teacher, wild mother, wild mentor supports their inner and outer lives, no matter what.